Welcome back.
Functions are the hardest part of JavaScript and it will take some time to fully get it however.
In this video we're going to try and do that.
We're going to learn JavaScript functions so let's start off with water functions well they're piece
of code that perform actions without functions.
Javascript wouldn't really do anything.
The beauty is that functions can perform one action or multiple actions but we'll get back to that first.
Let's talk about how you already know some JavaScript functions without even realizing it.
You've seen them before.
Alert that's a function prompt.
That's a function you've seen these before so javascript provides for us some functions that are really
really useful so that everybody who writes JavaScript can use them without having to write them over
and over so with functions we have two options.
One is using existing JavaScript functions like alert and prompt and 2 we can create our own.
So before we get into how we create our own functions and what is so useful about them you might have
no set notice one thing these brackets that are right next to each other with functions.
What do they mean well that in JavaScript means to execute the function so let's see if what happens
when I just type an alert and press enter I get half alert and some weird stuff.
Hmm.
F over here stands for function you can see when I hover over it it says function alert.
This is what running a function means in order to live run alert.
I execute it by calling it like this so these brackets mean calling a function so I can call a function
and you also notice that within alert I can have things like Hi there.
These are called arguments and I know I'm throwing a bunch of jargon bunch of the wars at you but these
are just things that you'll hear over and over when you're a developer and they'll stick to you a won't
the first time.
But like I said just try and get there one step at a time.
So arguments are what's given to functions.
For example when we did in our example here.
Hello.
And the console log was an argument and the interesting thing is that you can have multiple arguments
for example if I remove this and just have legislative console log for now I can do.
How are you.
I save and refresh and I get.
Hello how are you.
See I can have multiple arguments but just adding a comma but again that depends on the function.
Now again before we start creating our own let's review alert is a function alert with the brackets.
I'm calling the alert function and I am calling the alert function with the argument high alert needs
to be called otherwise is just sitting there.
Now the big reason to use function is that you can call them as many times as you want.
Think about alert.
Imagine having to say every time Hey computer create this pop up window and print whatever argument
I put in every time.
I mean that would really suck isn't it nice that we can just call alert and that pop up window pops
up for us and everything's done for you.
Well that's pretty much what functions do they make life easier by having actions bundled up so you
only write them once and then you can just call it okay.
So let's get to the fun part.
Let's create our own functions so if we go back to our document here let's see right here we have two
ways of creating functions and I'll show you the first way.
Actually I'm going to show you this one first.
So let's create her own function using the first method which is function declaration.
And we're gonna use our script J.S. here that's linked to our ACM all that we did and the previous video
so here I can say function.
Say hello
is console dot log hello again.
The syntax a little bit different but you just have to remember it.
I'm saying function is gonna be called say hello we have those brackets that are very familiar to us
and then console log.
Hello.
Let's see what happens when I save I refresh.
Nothing happens.
Why is that.
Well we declared this function but remember what we did with alert.
Well it exists but we haven't run it.
We have to call the function.
So we have to say say hello like so and now when I refresh.
I get.
Hello so think of this.
With the variable when I say variable a equals five.
That's not gonna do anything until we actually get the A.
And that's when it prints five
okay.
So that's one way.
What's the second way of creating a function.
The second way is called function expression and this goes like this.
I can say variable say by equals function console dot log by again I'll save this and refresh.
And again we only get Hello because well again we have to call that function.
So I say say by run it and refresh.
Hello by now one thing you may have noticed here is that we're assigning this function to the same by
variable.
But what is the name of the function.
I mean here clearly function's name is say hello.
But here we're we're just assigning to the variable I mean technically the function doesn't have a name.
And this is called an anonymous function.
We've assigned this function to say by so we can reference it through say by.
But otherwise we can't really access this function.
Well you'll see why that's important in later videos but you could technically do this and call this
function by by
OK.
So now that we know how to create functions why do we need these arguments remember why do we need stuff
inside of the brackets.
I mean these look useful enough right.
Well let's try something saying let's do a function sing and this thing we'll have we'll have console
dialogue and I'll say that's that's me singing and it also have console dialogue to the south I saying
now if I save this and refresh make sure it's still saying oh I have to call it
let's refresh.
Beautiful song tee but now every time I want to change to a different song maybe I wanted to say la
di da.
Well I have to either delete this and change this to La de da or I have to create a new one calling
sing to console the log and you can see over here how annoying that is that I'm typing the same thing
over and over and just changing these things.
And now I have to run sing to and I refresh and who now is tiring.
I did all of this and now imagine if we had thousands of songs that we want to sing where Spotify and
we want to display all the song lyrics.
I mean that's pretty pretty tying right.
And one of the rules with developers is it's this idea of dry do not repeat yourself.
Ideally you want to make things as efficient as possible.
And one thing you can do is by adding arguments so I can add something like song and now let me just
delete this for now in the console log I can just say song.
So now any time I want to change the song I can say la de da sing
Lou man sing
Backstreets fact.
All right
so nice save and refresh and look at that you see how many lines of code we just saved and how I can
now use sing anytime I want and I can customize it to what I want.
Kind of like a lyric that's what arguments two arguments allow us to not repeat ourself and make our
functions what we call more extensible they can be customized let's do one other thing to learn a fun
thing about functions we're going to delete this and try.
Function multiply and we'll give it a and b so I'll accept two arguments and we'll do a times B.
And now within a times b will say multiply and you'll call multiply five 10 save and refresh.
And now we should have multiply available to us.
You can see over here multiply maybe a times b exactly where we wrote.
OK.
So what happens if I do multiply
five and ten.
What do you think I'll get.
Let's see
that's really weird.
Let's try that again with a different number still undefined.
Why is that.
Well this called debugging.
Let's see if we can figure out what's happening here.
I'm going to do a console log here and I'm going to log out a and b to make sure that this function
is actually running.
So I'm going to save and refresh.
OK console log a and b and we just run the function again console.
OK.
So it looks like it's running but then I'm getting undefined over here.
Well I can show you this in a diagram.
So a function is an input.
We give it some sort of an input may sometimes it's empty.
So that's whatever is in the bracket in our case it's a and b.
So those are numbers so five and 10 and then the function does whatever we tell it to do in our case
it was to multiply five and 10 and then we get an output but we're not getting that output.
Why is that.
Well because a function works like this.
And don't worry I've just added a bunch of arrows but I'll go through everything and explain it to you.
The input is receiving five and 10.
The function does some stuff and up to this point we've only done console log.
And the way console log works is the function is saying yep just log it to the console in the browser
but we've never done it where we've returned a value.
Let me show you what I mean when we don't return something we get undefined when we return something
we get the value.
So let's see over here if we can explain this so here whenever I'm saying multiply 10 and five and I'm
going to remove the console just so it doesn't confuse us save and refresh I get undefined that is because
as you see in this diagram we're not returning anything.
So in Javascript the way you return things is you have to put in return instead of a function.
So now it's going to return a times b and you see that it's a it's a special word in JavaScript it highlighted
in red.
Well now it's saying yep we're going to return the value so even if we added console log it'll do console
lock and then ask Hey do I have a return if I do I'm going to send it a value hopefully that's not too
confusing let's see if it works I'm going to save and refresh.
And now if I do multiply five and 10 I get 50
yay we got our function of working and that's is a very important key concept that we need to remember
is that we need to return something from a function.
I mean we don't have to.
But ideally we do so we don't get these cases where we just have undefined and we don't know what the
function does is kind of like a black box that does something and we might get a console log or not
but we don't know what's happening inside.
It's nice to have a return to make sure that the function acts the way we expect it to get what if we
do something like this.
What if I do return a and I forgot a semicolon in here and returned B what do you think will happen
let's refresh and run this.
OK.
What if I change the order and I put a first.
Let's try that again I get five and return is the final way to end a function if that makes sense so
as soon as you say return in a function the program exits so to go through this I say multiply five
and 10 it goes to the function it says yep I have the function multiply I'm going to put a US five and
10 as B and now it goes into the function and says Return 5 which is a.
So returns that and it exits the function.
So now these two lines aren't being run at all the program simply reads this goes to here reads the
first line of the function and then exits.
So in a function you should have one return same or is that right.
Let's see a case where that might not be correct.
Let's add an if statement to this let's say that we want to do multiply but we're also kind of lazy
and we don't want to be too hard with the computer.
So let's say we want to say that if we remember this statement if a is greater than 10 or if B is greater
than 10
we can say return that's too hard.
Otherwise
we'll return a times b let's see what happens here.
I'm going to save and refresh this to multiply
and for I get 20.
What if we do five and 40 I get.
That's too hard because now it's reading the function five and 10 and it's saying B which is 40 is higher
than 10.
So according to the if statement I'm going to that's too hard.
And because a return exits the function it never gets to this even if I do return a times B you'll never
get there because the return exits the function just to double check.
Let's do that.
Let's do five times 40 and it never gets to any of these lines because as soon as it sees a return it
exits the function.
I know it's a lot and we'll get to why these things are important in the next couple of videos but I
wanted to also show you that you can have inner function.
So in JavaScript functions are variables and what that means is that we are able to assign
functions like this right and if we did something like this well we can call a in the same way that
we did and we just assigned function as variable.
So technically we could do something like this.
So let's have multiply.
Let's go back to the way we had it will leave.
Multiply the way it is and the simple form
and we can actually
say alert
multiply and then here we'll do three and four.
And I know that's a lot of brackets.
Don't worry we'll go through it but let's just save this and refresh and see what happens.
I get twelve because what's happening is we're starting with the inner function we're saying hey we
want to alert something what do you want to alert.
Well we want to multiply.
We want to call this function and give it three and four.
So it goes to multiply and it says Yeah I'll assign a and b to three and four.
And I want to return and B.
So now multiply gets changed to twelve and then we alert.
So you see that now instead of having something like total multiply four five and then putting total
here we can just assign multiply into here.
That was that was a lot but I want to show you that we've we've tackled I think the hardest topic in
JavaScript which is functions and we've also covered her return well which is very very good.
One other thing I want to show you is that a lot of people get confused with the terminology and I don't
think it's as important but I just want to clarify it.
There's the concept of parameters and arguments now parameters and arguments kind of our are very similar
but just slightly different.
So arguments as we've said are four and five.
So functions can have arguments and they get cold with arguments.
Parameters are what a and b is.
So multiply has two parameters of A and B I know that's a little bit confusing.
You can read up on it a little bit more.
I don't think it's important to really know the difference but just so whenever you're reading articles
or learning maybe through YouTube that you'll hear these words almost interchangeably they pretty much
mean the same thing just a little bit slight difference in the All right.
I know I know I thrown a lot of terminology you but after repeating it a few times it will make sense.
So stay strong but that's it for function.
It's time for you to try some exercises.
We watched this video if you need to.
You really want to make sure you understand functions since it will be the core of JavaScript.
Just remember what we are doing with functions is we are creating new words in the language in the javascript
language so we can create variables or we can create functions to add vocabulary to the language and
up to this point.
That's all we've been doing.
We got this javascript that had a few words that we can use.
And we've added new ones like multiply and total in order to make it more useful to us.
And that's what programming is.
I'll see in the next one by.